utilitarianism always and inevitably
leads to involves and justifies
authoritarianism as the simple thesis of
this video
it's a video that is in part inspired by
the sincere stupidity of another
youtuber named cosmic skeptic he's
stupid but I'm sure he's sincere and has
good intentions he doesn't really
understand how dangerous the ideas he's
playing with our politically ethically
or I may say philosophically so I make
this short discussion as a sort of
warning at least the members of my own
audience who may have noticed that here
on the internet utilitarianism in the
21st century it is going through a
little bit of a revival of interest and
it's a certain kind of person who's
getting interested in the dusty old
books of John Stuart Mill now in the
21st century it's the sort of person who
wants to believe that there's an
objectively real standard of what is in
your best interest as an individual and
that there's an objectively real
standard for what is in the best
interest of our society as a whole the
greater good that the pleasure pain
calculus yields a knowable objectively
real measure of what is best for you and
for us and that that's not merely the
opinion of the people who happen to be
in power again it may be political power
the leader of a country or the coterie
of a few dozen people the elite of a
government democratic or not most
countries there are just a few dozen
people at the top even if they call
themselves a democracy
it probably operates like an oligarchy
in between elections it's big problem we
have in 21st century um or if you're
talking about say the directors of a
hospital or the directors of a
university or the directors of a
foundation there's a similar question of
a small elite of people in positions of
authority who decide what is in the best
interest of others what is in the best
interests of the students of the
patients no and you know there's an
unexamined reliance of the philosophy of
John Stuart Mill on a germ
philosopher who's completely forgotten
in the English language called
Vilhelm von Humboldt Humboldt is still
famous in Germany but outside of Germany
he's completely forgotten and this is
slippery the type of reasoning we engage
in with this as I say implicitly
authoritarian line of reasoning about
making judgments but what's in the
greater interest of everyone and then
applying them to individuals or
vice-versa you can apply to individuals
and work your way up to apply to senemo
with humboldt he's primarily a
philosopher of education and you can
choose examples in the philosophy of
education or in the field of education
that are very flattering to the
utilitarian view of the world right
washing your hands to remove bacteria to
prevent the spread of disease this is
something so useful that so much
improved society that PRO much improves
your life as an individual and the
welfare of society so that it's very
easy to come to the conclusion that on a
utilitarian basis we ought to force
everyone to believe in and practice this
principle of hygiene we ought to educate
the whole population about the bacterial
theory of disease sorry technically it's
called the germ theory of disease but
bacteria and viruses we ought to educate
the whole public we have to have
teachers and school children and even
priests and vicars and nuns led to
mobilize all of society to know about
this science and live their lives
accordingly and of course at the time
John Stuart Mill was alive not everyone
knew how well Havilah home bought
Humboldt and so on - and of course still
today depending on where you live in the
world back when I lived in places like
Laos and Cambodia you had people who
really did not know where sickness came
from you met people who really lived
with a lot of misconceptions about these
things and another example really
quickly I met a lot of people in Laos
who really did not know that burning
plastic in a fire released toxic fumes
that were better they were totally
unaware that they take plastic and they
would treat it like wood in a fire even
though the smell is really bad they
didn't have this concept you could have
a
just gas produced by fire so when you're
talking about this kind of simple
example taken from the Health Sciences
now we seem to have you know an
objectively real scientifically certain
standard of something that is in your
best interest in my best interest and
our best interest and that society can
be ruled by these simple utilitarian
conclusions and it almost doesn't matter
who's in charge doesn't matter if it's a
communist government or a kingdom with a
hereditary monarch or democracy no
matter who is in charge you should know
about washing your hands how to avoid
getting sick in terms of education
there's a limited range of these
examples and as soon as we step outside
of that the authoritarian implications
of this utilitarian view of the world
become evident very quickly society
needs nurses society benefits from
having more nurses in many societies
around the world not all but in many
there's a shortage of nurses should you
force people to become nurses I have
known two women myself in my only two
I'm remembering in anybody who received
free education to become a nurse they
weren't forced no no one of them was
forced one of them was forced and one
had a choice actually out of these two
women they receive free education to
become qualified as nurses and they both
decided they hated this job so much they
hated the type of work so much they were
not going to do it then we're gonna try
to strike off in different direction
some other kind of business some other
kind of life okay being a nurse it's
very easy to say in this kind of
utilitarian objectively real calculus
what do you mean it's a well-paying job
it's good for you it helps other people
it's good for society as a whole
terms of this utilitarian calculus
especially for talking with a woman who
has already gone through the hard work
of completing nursing college you ought
to be a nurse you should be a nurse
benefits you benefit society it's for
the greater good
the greatest number of people being a
nurse involves wiping the poo out of
someone's bum who has diarrhea right
involves spending time with elderly
people who are quivering and quaking in
their hospital bed and hoping to be them
wipe the poo off them and help them it's
it's helping them you are you are making
the world a better place you're hoping
that that one person no doubt not for
everybody
subjectively some people can do that job
and feel good about themselves and feel
more it's rewarding and maybe partly
because they're aware it's for the
greatest good its greatest number of
people okay and some people would find
it miserable and denigrating and beneath
their dignity and beneath contempt and
these sorts of questions seem to be
asked the least when we have an overall
situation of emergency such as an
ongoing war you know so again I knew
people who had lived through long long
periods of warfare in Cambodia and Laos
and you know people would sometimes be
presented with these kinds of options
okay you have an injured foot so you
can't fight anymore
so do you want to be a nurse or do you
want to be a schoolteacher taking care
of the children like that's that's what
their society needs and you're talking
about a society which is something like
a refugee camp or something like an army
camp out in the jungle you know this is
the what we call the Vietnam War from
the Western perspective whatever okay
well look there are kids you need to be
taken care of do you want to get a
little bit of training and start doing
that
or do you want to you know hang out in
the surgeons theater and help them with
you know surgery and medical situations
you get a little bit training this is
obviously there's no university level
education here but you get some
on-the-job training and a lot of people
live with this and this is in a totally
authoritarian situation where you know
the Communist Party running your camp or
whatever it is
oh okay you can't fight here your
choices you know there might be just two
or three choices this is what you're
this is what you're gonna do you know
you can't fight you can't dig ditches
you can't
stack up sandbags or something you know
there are they're physically demanding
jobs okay we're here you're options what
are you gonna do and within the the
context of the desperation of having
bombs falling out of the sky over your
head and not knowing if you're gonna
live or die in the context of such acute
human need and suffering as being in a
refugee camp or being in the middle of a
war zone or whatever sure we tend to
overlook the authoritarian element it's
of absolutely crucial importance who are
you to decide that what's best for me is
to become a nurse who are you to decide
that what's best for me is to become a
schoolteacher even if it seems so easy
and beguiling to draw up this calculus
that it would be in the greatest good
for the greatest number of people to
have me be a nurse or to have another
five thousand people become nurses
whatever the quota is that the
government is pursuing who decides who
decides what is in my best interests who
decides who defines the greatest good
the greatest happiness for the greatest
number of people it may seem very
obvious to you my viewer whoever you are
that it's for the greatest happiness to
provide teenagers with an education in
high school it really has a lot of mixed
signals about sexuality like well you're
free to have sex when you want to but
you should use a condom because you get
pregnant use AIDS you know what I mean
this kind of normal twenty-first century
liberal sex education you may say it's
in the greatest happiness for the
greatest number of people to basically
tell teenagers that it's okay for them
to sleep around but you know they got to
use a condom and they got to worry about
getting pregnant and getting AIDS and so
on you know what there's a large number
of people who are called conservatives
where you live they might be 51% of the
population there might be 31 there are a
lot of people called conservatives who
say no no no it's in the greatest
greatest happiness of the greatest
number people to teach those teenagers
that they should remain celibate until
marriage
do you think there's an objectively real
calculus we can present here do you
think there isn't a subjective and
authoritarian element of decision-making
you know there are people who are Muslim
Christian Jewish there are even some
people who are Buddhist you can target
some conservative Japanese Buddhist
probably who really see the role of
education in relation to sexuality as
being restricting delimiting and
defining in this way to avoid of course
you know pregnancy and heartbreak and
prostitution all the things that come
out of having a more you know sexually
liberated society where people get to
make those choices
what is the right solution now I am a
nihilist
I also favor open democracy okay
so I think you get people together who
don't believe in anything
you let them discuss and debate and vote
and you have transparency and public
accountability and I hope I hope that
with the passage of time people make the
right decision you know but they
probably gonna make the wrong decision
five times before they come to a
decision okay it's it's like a can of
tomato sauce rolling down a staircase
the progress of democracy it has no
geometric perfection to it okay it's
never going to satisfy the fantasy of
these guys reading John Stuart Mill and
again what they're really reading
indirectly is the fantasy of villain von
Humboldt in his philosophy education and
they don't even know it okay now on a
one-to-one basis I'm not an authority
figure
but people watch my YouTube channel and
they develop some kind of trust for me
and it's pretty often that they do ask
me questions about their own education
in their own career people ask me
questions like will they personally be
happy is it a good choice for them
individually to become a nurse or not
and there's some people have talked to
enough where I got to know them a little
bit I said well if you're gonna become a
nurse as these advantages and these
disadvantages if you're this kind of
person it could be okay but you know
think about this think about that and
you kind of try to talk through diff
elements and draw their attention to so
they are making the decision themselves
I don't I don't tell them what to think
of what you can conclude like well are
you really this kind of person or not
guys like humbled because I don't want
to make it I don't like you sound like
all the evil it's on the part of John
Stuart Mill and and Humboldt was one you
know um
this philosophy of education stuff okay
seems really to come to the conclusion
that everyone should know how to wash
their hands how to avoid disease in that
level okay right and the the utility
there is largely negative it's avoiding
disease it's avoiding disastrous
consequences how do you think Humboldt
came to this conclusion that it was like
really meaningful for people to learn
topics like geometry and algebra and
ancient Greek philosophy do you think
that's objectively real do you think
there's a utilitarian pleasure pain
calculus that says that you are to spend
your time learning geometry algebra
let's say theoretical physics different
types of math that you may never use
your life that never may be meaningful
to you individual people talk to me and
they say they're thinking about getting
a university degree in theoretical
physics or theoretical math this kind of
abstract reasoning and you can imagine
on a one-to-one basis you can talk to
somebody and ask them okay do you really
think this is gonna be meaningful for
you in your life and think it all the
way through because yeah it's possible
you know you study the theoretical math
and then you go on to have a career
that's really linked to that as a
professor or some other some other field
where you're really using it but you
know what
it's also very possible you get this
university degree you put all this time
and effort into this kind of math and
then it's not part of your life after
that right like you know it's is that
still going to be meaningful for you if
you go on and get a job in an unrelated
field a very large percentage of people
will I met guys who were working as
English teachers in Bangkok Thailand in
Beijing China
I met guys so they had PhDs some of them
in theoretical physics or advanced
mathematics this kind of thing and now
they're teaching children in Asia how to
say a is for Apple B is for ball and
that's the correct are you some people
we have
some people will feel like the study of
mathematics is rewarding and meaningful
and important in a way that that's son
they're gonna carry with them for the
rest of their lives something they want
to do that's the person they want to be
that's the mode of thinking that for
them is rewarding in an almost religious
sense they want to do is the right
choice for them for some people a life
of service being bossed around at the
hospital being the lowest rung in the
hospital where the doctors treat you
like crap and probably even that
janitors treat you like crap being a
nurse in a hospital and wiping the poo
off of some old man who has amoebic
dysentery and helping people and coping
and struggling with the schedule and
sleep deprivation and human misery there
are some people for whom subjectively
and almost religiously that's meaningful
and that's rewarding and not everyone
and we can never come to an objectively
real utilitarian calculus where we say
this is the best thing for you as an
individual and then scaling it up this
is the best thing for society as a whole
I'm a snob I really care about ancient
Greek philosophy I nevertheless think
Willem von Humboldt was a maniac
he was an imbecile to think that the
whole population of Germany should be
forced to study ancient Greek philosophy
I think it's kind of unbelievably cruel
that we for schoolchildren in Canada to
learn types of advanced and theoretical
mathematics that not even 1% of them
will ever use in their lives after they
leave school and it's really denigrating
I mean it may not be in the education
system where you are even the way we
teach English literature grammar the way
we teach English in Canada I find it
denigrating and humiliating for the
students and you're dragging through the
mud for nothing it won't benefit them in
any way doesn't make it doesn't make
them a better person that's something
we'll know how bob was interested in but
any sincere inquiry into this even
within the philosophy education has to
begin with the nihilistic record
that I can never come to an objectively
real conclusion about what is in your
best interest in education this way not
when we step outside of that very
limited realm of wash your hands in
order to avoid getting amoebic dysentery
or other diseases that can be
communicated by touch right as soon as
we step beyond that there's no way I can
tell you it's in the interest it's in
your best interest it's for your
greatest happiness for you to learn
advanced geometry advanced trigonometry
advanced algebra and there's definitely
no way I could say hey for this society
as a whole it's in the greatest good
whoo the greatest good of the greatest
number of people to force all of these
children to learn this mathematical sum
to learn this particular branch of
philosophy can't we recognize that this
is just exercising authority that this
is the beating heart of authoritarianism
that's been taken out of the context of
the church fathers it's been taken away
from the village elder it's been put in
the hands of an academic social science
researcher we put a lab coat on it but
this is really no different from the
village shaman claiming that he knows
what's best for you claiming that he
knows what's best for society as a whole
the magic trick that utilitarians do is
simply trying to ascribe to the universe
as objectively real what our merely
subjective judgments about what is
pleasant and unpleasant what is best for
you what is best for society as a whole
and those judgments ultimately are
forced upon others in a manner that can
only be described as authoritarian